{{ page.title }}
----------------

<div class="publish_date">
{{ page.date | date\_to\_string }}
</div>

> This is a partial, working draft, and sections may be incomplete.
> 6/15/13

Liane Gabora’s (2013a) recent article “An evolutionary framework for
cultural change: selectionism versus commual exchange,” included invited
comments by a number of researchers from a variety of fields, and a
response by the author (Gabora 2013b). Carl Lipo and I wrote one of the
comments in which we question Gabora’s basic claim that *“culture does
not evolve through a selectionist process”* (Madsen and Lipo 2013a)

Comments in *Physics of Life Reviews* are necessarily short – 3000
characters was the limit we were given. Our comment was thus quite
telegraphic, listing the reasons why we believe Gabora’s claim is
flawed, without supporting detail. These notes are the beginnings of an
attempt to flesh out that argument. We feel this is important because
Gabora’s response makes it clear that we are simply talking past one
another, on an issue that is important to the study of evolutionary
theory and the social sciences.

### Is Gabora Redefining Natural Selection?

We stated that Gabora “adds unnecessary conditions to the requirements
for selection.” Our rationale for this claim is simple: Gabora cites
(with approval) John Holland’s (1975) proposition that systems evolving
through natural selection share three “fundamental principles”:

1.  Sequestration of inherited information
2.  Distinction between genotype and phenotype
3.  Mechanisms for discarding acquired information

The core of Gabora’s argument against natural selection’s applicability
to cultural variation is that culture is a system of *acquired*
phenotypic variation, and “natural selection only works as an
explanation if acquired change is negligible.” The need for principles
like the three proferred by Holland follows directly, since in her view
selection can only proceed if acquired information can be held at bay.

We do not agree that the basic definition of natural selection as an
evolutionary process does, or should, include conditions such as Holland
lists, and Gabora adopts and advocates. The extent to which information
acquired during an organism’s lifespan can be passed on to other
organisms (including progeny) is a separate issue, one of the structure
of transmission systems and their effects on the patterns seen in
evolutionary histories. We return to this issue from an empirical
perspective in the next section.

We certainly agree that “acquired” information can, in a theoretical
model, dominate “inherited” information (depending upon their relative
abundances and respective roles in development), and that one could see
a loss of “phylogenetic signal” when attempting to determine taxonomic
relationships based only upon the genetic component of an organism’s
“genotype.” But if the issue is “what information goes into constructing
an organism’s phenotype,” then we should be much less concerned about
the distinction between “acquired” and “inherited” information since
each are sources of causal influence on phenotypes. One of the most
important contributions of “developmental systems theory” in the past
decade has been a “demotion” of genetic information from the central
role in constructing organisms and phenotypes, in favor of recognizing
that every organism is built, survives, and exerts causal force on
future generations through a variety of causal pathways, some genetic,
some structural and epigenetic, some ecological, and even observational
and linguistic (Jablonka and Lamb 2005; Oyama 2000; Oyama et al. 2003).

We see no reason to prejudge the question of whether selection can act
*effectively* upon a particular mix of inherited and acquired
information, given the recent literature on “inclusive inheritance”
among scholars formulating the “extended evolutionary synthesis” (e.g.,
Danchin 2011; Mesoudi et al. 2013; Bonduriansky 2012; Day and
Bonduriansky 2011; Pigliucci and Muller 2010). The question, to us, asks
not for an *a priori* answer which covers an entire inheritance system
(e.g., human social learning, or human language), or an entire taxon
(e.g., *Homo sapiens*), but specific answers for specific situations (we
return to this point below). The efficacy of natural selection in the
presence of mixed genetic, epigenetic, and cultural information is a
theoretical and empirical matter. Such questions are solved by forming
models of mixed inheritance systems, and then studying their fit to
empirical data. Such models are under construction in the case of
genetic and epigenetic mixes (e.g., Geoghegan and Spencer 2012), and
have a long history in the study of cultural transmission (e.g.,
Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1973a, 1973b, 1981; Lumsden and Wilson 1981;
Boyd and Richerson 1985).

### Sequestration of Inherited Versus Acquired Information

Much of Gabora’s argument that selection cannot apply to human culture
relies upon the lack of mechanisms in culture to partition “heritable”
from “acquired” variation, given her belief that natural selection
requires such a partition. In this section, we briefly review biological
examples which suggest that natural selection requires no such
partition. Evolution has constructed partitioning mechanisms, to be
sure, but their presence in some taxa and not others is not an
indication of where selection is present versus absent, but instead
evidence of what kinds of circumstances *favor* sequestration, given its
costs of construction and maintenance. We refer the reader to Leo Buss’s
important book *The Evolution of Individuality* for more examples and a
discussion of the evolutionary significance of sequestration mechanisms
(Buss 1987).

Plants do not sequester germ line cells from the remainder of the
somatic cells. Reproductive cells are constructed *from* somatic cells,
usually at the vegetative meristem. The fact that plants can accumulate
somatic mutations in branches, and then pass those mutations on to
offspring organisms, has long been understood (Buss 1987). Oak trees,
for example, are not genetically uniform but exhibit *genetic mosaicism*
given different mutations in different branches. The older the oak tree,
the greater the genetic diversity it possesses, and passes on seasonally
through its acorns to daughter oak trees. In certain respects, each oak
tree is a *population* of genomes, despite being a somatic individual
with integrated physiology. Despite this flagrant display of seemingly
“Lamarckian” incorporation of acquired variation into heritable
variation, nobody has seriously suggested that oak trees, or plants in
general for that matter, do not undergo natural selection. Plants
comprise one of the major divisions of life on Earth, and some 350,000+
species, all of which evolve by natural selection, without sequestration
of heritable information from environmental alteration.

Nor is this phenomenon limited to plants. The entire phylum Cnidaria,
comprising over 10,000 species of jellyfish and corals, and the sponges
(phylum Porifera), comprising over 9,000 species, do not possess
specialized germ cells, and do not have any type of sequestration
between somatic and heritable mutation (Buss 1987; Lieberman and Kaesler
2010). No one in the literature appears to be seriously suggesting that
the lack of germ cells prevents sponges, comb jellies, and corals from
undergoing natural selection.

The simple fact is that sequestration of specialized germ cells from the
rest of the soma, to prevent accumulation of somatic changes to the DNA
they carry, is a specialized adaptation that occurs in some major
metazoan taxa (Buss 1987). Germ line sequestration is not a
*precondition* for natural selection, but in fact is its product,
constructed and maintained in some lineages but not others. When we
claimed in our comment that “natural selection proceeds handily in many
taxa which do not sequester heritable information,” it is to these
370,000+ species of life to which we were referring.

Nor is a lack of sequestration the only means by which acquired
information can pass through reproduction to descendant organisms.
Various forms of epigenetic inheritance, including DNA methylation sites
and variation in chromatin packing levels, have been shown to be
heritable and provide a route for acquired information to affect
development in the next generation (see the excellent summary by
Jablonka and Lamb 2005). Epigenetic inheritance systems (EIS) are common
across animal and plant taxa, and operative in humans.

Simply put, it is not true that natural selection cannot occur in the
presence of acquired variation. Among the Metazoa, one entire kingdom
and two major animal phyla completely lack mechanisms for isolating a
“germ line” from somatic variation. Nearly all Metazoa have one or more
of the recognized epigenetic inheritance systems, suggesting that such
mechanisms are ancient, generatively entrenched components of metazoan
development. The inheritance by progeny of information acquired by
organisms during ontogeny is a routine occurrence, despite the
documented activity of natural selection in many lineages. Gabora is
simply wrong that selection is incompatible with a mixture of acquired
and inherited information.

Culture is nothing more than a set of genetically supported behavioral
mechanisms by which information acquired during the lifetime of an
organism can be shared with conspecifics. There is no *a priori* reason
we can see that DNA methylation and chromatin marking would affect
fitness and thus be subject to selection, but bird song acquisition or
apprenticeship and teaching among humans would not.

This brings us full circle to our original claim in Madsen and Lipo
(2013a): Gabora is attempting to show that natural selection is
inapplicable to human culture, by adding unnecessary conditions for its
operation to her definitions. Phenotypic variation among individuals is
required for selection to occur; sequestration of a “germ line” of
inherited genetic (or cultural) information is not.

### Natural Selection and the Meaning of “Random Variation”

Nor does selection *require* that variation be generated “randomly.” It
is certainly our understanding that the *teaching*of Darwinian
evolution, from the Modern Synthesis through today, teaches that
phenotypic variation is “random” or “blind” and that selection provides
the directional force in evolution. Verbal descriptions of evolutionary
theory and natural selection from Mayr to Dobzhansky to contemporary
textbooks contain such descriptions (including the Hartl and Clark
textbook that Gabora advised us to examine). And mathematical models of
mutation often use random variables to generate new variants. But a
balanced reading of the contemporary research literature reveals a much
more interesting picture.

Let’s leave culture aside for the moment, and focus only upon biological
systems and their variation, using the standard device of the “fitness
landscape” (Wright 1932; Gavrilets 2010). And let’s start with
mutations, which present the clearest case for random variation in
evolution. Most *mutations* are produced randomly. Variants which arise
through random nucleotide substitutions in a DNA sequence are random in
two ways: the distribution of such mutations on the fitness landscape
are described by a statistical distribution and are “isotropic” in
“direction” on that landscape, and second, there is no causal coupling
between the generation of such a mutant and the current gradient of
fitness on the landscape.

Apart from simple mutations, the means by which genetic variation is
generated is rarely “random” in the probabilistic sense. As is well
known by now, developmental biology had little role in the Modern
Synthesis, but since the 1980’s, an increasing focus on “evolutionary
developmental biology” (or “evo-devo”) has revealed a host of details
about how development generates phenotypic variation from genetic and
epigenetic variants. Much of the phenotypic variation created by
modifying the details of developmental events (e.g., timing, levels of
expression) is highly structured in terms of “direction” in phenotype
space but it is “uncoupled” from adaptive direction. In other words, the
mechanisms of development can construct new variants which employ or
“build upon” existing structures and thus are not “random” with respect
to existing variants, but it is still the selective filter that
determines which variants are adaptive. Kirschner and Gerhart (2005;
Gerhart and Kirschner 2007) refer to this as “facilitated variation,”
which is probably a better term than “directed variation,” given the
latter term’s history of referring to variation *coupled* to adaptation.

![Classes of Variation](/images/variation-classes.png)

We’re not suggesting that most genetic variation is non-random, or that
the standard pedagogical picture of “blind variation” and “directional
selection” isn’t a useful way to teach the basics of Darwinian
evolution. But simple descriptions of a complex theory hide detail and
complexity, and it is increasingly clear that Darwinian natural
selection can operate upon both random and non-random sources of
variation. The “amount” of non-random variation in genetic inheritance
may be smaller than with epigenetic or cultural inheritance, and
probably is. Culture, in particular, is rife with mechanisms for
“facilitated” variation, but planning, foresight, experimentation, and
other such mechanisms are not necessarily *coupled* to adaptive outcomes
(Mesoudi 2007). A “good try” is not the same thing as automatically
detecting the optimal strategy or outcome.

Much of our evolutionary pedagogy does focus on randomness in the sense
of direction, but it is the “coupling” between variation and fitness (or
adaptive effect) that is crucial to distinguishing between Darwinian
theory and the bundle of theories which go under the name “Lamarckian.”
In developing the implications of Darwin’s theory of natural selection
for generating adaptation out of the raw material of phenotypic
variation, 19th and early 20th century Darwinians stressed the
*decoupling* of the generation of variation and its selection (Toulmin
1972:337). The Lamarckian account of adaptation, in contrast, couples
three elements to form a “one step” process. Variation is acquired
during the lifetime of an organism and then is heritable in future
generations, that variation is non-random but instead is “directed”
towards better function, and finally the mechanisms of “direction” are
coupled to the actual performance of function. Darwin himself recognized
the possibility of the inheritance of acquired characters, but believed
that the third element – adaptive coupling – was incorrect and was
instead a two-step process, as do modern Darwinians (including
ourselves). We have no trouble accepting that the “inheritance of
acquired characters” occur in genetic evolution, and of course cultural
transmission is nothing but a mechanism for the IAC, and we have no
trouble accepting that some variation is generated non-randomly. We also
have no trouble accepting that all such variation is then subject to
natural selection.

### Natural Selection: Force, or Statistical Consequence?

lorem ipsum sic dolor amet

### Evolution as a Mix of Darwinian and Populational Processes…

lorem ipsum sic dolor amet

### …And Cultural Evolution Even More So

lorem ipsum sic dolor amet

### References Cited

{% bibliography -f gabora %}
