{{ page.title }}
----------------

<div class="publish_date">
{{ page.date | date\_to\_string }}
</div>

### Motivation

I’m always interested in the conceptual structure of scientific
theories, because in the social sciences we’re not good at putting
theory together yet. We mainly borrow and adapt, but there are reasons
why a specific theory performs well in a specific discipline to explain
specific phenomena. In particular, I’m interested in how physical theory
combines dynamical processes (which generate change through time in
system state), with constraints that winnow down the possible number of
models and theories to those which actually describe the world. And how
physical theories often display different observable behavior when
observed at different length or time scales.

All of these are issues we face in constructing evolutionary theory for
human cultural variation.

Why quantum field theory? Because field theories are useful in that they
describe the summed contributions of many locally interacting processes,
to observables that can be measured at points in space and time. Field
theories also describe the dynamics of the entire ensemble, given those
local interactions. And quantum field theories have clear mechanisms by
which observational scale is incorporated into models to give “effective
theories” at particular length/energy scales. So despite its
mathematical complexities, QFT is an excellent paradigm of the type of
formal theory structure that might be useful for us in the evolutionary
social sciences. It’s worth noting that Dodd and Ferguson (2009)
employed this approach to population and epidemiological models, which
is what stimulated my thinking here.

Duncan’s book is unlike most QFT text in focusing specifically on the
conceptual structure of the theory, rather than just teaching the models
and methods, or the history of its development.

### Components of QFT

Duncan notes that QFT is a combination of three “ingredients”:

1.  Dynamical theory – in this case, quantum mechanics. Specifies how to
    describe the state of objects in the world, how to interpret the
    formalisms describing their state and changes in that state, and how
    state can change.
2.  Symmetries – in this case, Lorentz invariance and various gauge
    symmetries. The role of symmetries is to explain why some state and
    evolution functions are allowable in a theory, as opposed to the
    infinity of possible functions. The symmetries of the Poincaré
    group, for example, generate the plethora of field equations one
    actually encounters (e.g., Dirac, Klein-Gordon), and provide the
    ingredients for constructing “allowable” Hamiltonians for the
    dynamical evolution of a system.\
3.  Clustering or locality – in this case, the insensitivity of local
    processes to distant parts of the environment. QFT follows “Einstein
    causality,” in which causal influence can only travel within a light
    cone, and thus local processes are limited, and do not have to take
    into account global system state for every calculation.

Clustering is both a precondition for successful experiments, since we
can never measure everything about the world, and a constraint on
possible models. Duncan points out that although \#1 and \#2 above are
widely considered to be the “ingredients” of modern fundamental physics,
it’s really \#3 that sharpens down the possible infinity of models
consistent with these (i.e., all the “unphysical” models), to a single
“physical” model which agrees with experiment.

### Applications

Why am I fascinated by this – the conceptual structure of a theory very
different than what we study in the evolutionary biology of culture?

Part of it lies in the obvious parallels between some of the
mathematical constructs. Evolutionary theory is an *n-body interacting
system*, even if our simplest deterministic models in undergraduate
population genetics do not reveal this. Evolution displays critical
behavior, phase transitions, frustration and thus spin-glass-like
behavior, and can sometimes be formulated in models straight out of
statistical mechanics (and increasingly is).

But the deeper reason is that simple models of evolution (and cultural
transmission) are too simple – *too diffusionist* – to capture the
richness of behavior and the structure we see in our empirical data.
What we lack are constraints that give us complexity. Perhaps the ways
in which we interact in realistic social networks give us symmetries
that constrain how the diffusion of traits can happen. Perhaps the
modular structure of cultural information, skills, and objects give us
symmetries that constrain how the diffusion of traits can happen. Taken
together, perhaps these two sets of symmetries break up the otherwise
smooth – *like concentric ripples on a pond after throwing a stone* –
and wave-like diffusion models, and yield instead the complex patterns
we see in real populations.

Perhaps. There are certainly other ways to talk about this issue of
theory structure, and those with less of a “physics fascination” than I
will certainly prefer them. I find physical theory a rich source of
ideas, not about content, but about the conceptual structures we might
use as we get beyond the “toy models” of our early explorations and try
to build increasingly realistic theory about the evolution of culture.
